---
date: 2017-07-03T08:30:37-04:00
title: Consumer Contract and Consumer Driven Contract
---

When discussing [service evolution](evolution/), we have mentioned consumer contract
and recommended building consumer side regression test cases to ensure that service
updates won't break any consumer. Consumer contract is not a new concept and it was
introduced in SOA architecture to address service evolution in XML schema. The same
concept is still suitable for the microserivces architecture which normally based on
JSON and some sort of RPC schema. 

# Provider Contract

A provider contract expresses a service provider's business function capabilities in 
terms of the set of exportable elements necessary to support that functionality. From 
a service evolution point of view, a contract is a container for a set of exportable 
business function elements. A non-normative list of these elements includes:

## Schemas 

Schemas are the parts of a provider contract most likely to change as the service 
evolves. In restful OpenAPI specification, they map to the definitions for the request 
and response.

## Interfaces

In their simplest form, service provider interfaces comprise the set of exportable 
operation signatures a consumer can exploit to drive the behaviour of a provider. 
Message-oriented systems typically export relatively simple operation signatures and 
push the business intelligence into the messages they exchange. In a message-oriented 
system, received messages drive endpoint behaviour according to semantics encoded in 
the message header or payload. RPC-like services, on the other hand, encode more of 
their business semantics in their operation signatures. Either way, consumers depend 
on some portion of a provider's interface to realise business value, and in consequence 
we must account for interface consumption when evolving our service. In OpenAPI spec,
interfaces map to operations/endpoints.


## Conversations 

Service providers and consumers exchange messages in conversations that compose one or 
more message exchange patterns such as request-response and fire-and-forget. Over the 
course of a conversation a consumer may expect the provider to externalize some state 
particular to the interaction in the messages that it sends and receives. Most restful
APIs are stateless; however, there are relationships between different endpoints which
form conversational conventions. 

## Policy 

Besides exporting schemas, interfaces and conversations, service providers may declare 
and enforce specific usage requirements that govern how the other elements of the 
contract can be realised. Most commonly, these requirements relate to the security in 
which a consumer can exploit a provider's functionality. This maps to OpenAPI security
definitions.

## Quality of service 

The business value potential that service providers and consumers exploit is often 
evaluated in the context of specific quality of service characteristics such as 
availability, latency and throughput. We should consider these characteristics as 
likely constituents of a provider contract and account for them in our service 
evolution strategies. There is no specific mapping in OpenAPI spec for QoS, but it
can be defined in the same document as part of the extension. 

Above list of elements defines logical view of the service for its business function. 
Also from a service evolution perspective, it defines a list of elements
that we have to be very careful in changing them as they are inter-related to each
other and one or more consumers might be impacted. Different type of services might 
have their provider contracts defined only as sub-set of the elements. For example, 
internal API contract might not have explicit QoS definition.


# Consumer Contracts

If we decide to account for consumer expectations regarding the schemas we expose 
when evolving our service - and consider it worth our provider knowing about them - 
then we need to import those consumer expectations into the provider. The consumer
contract can be reflected as a set of regression test cases that, if implemented 
by the provider, might help ensure the provider continues to meet its commitments to 
its clients. By implementing these tests, the provider gains a better understanding 
of how it can evolve the structure of the messages it produces without breaking 
existing functionality in the service community. And where a proposed change would 
in fact break one or more consumers, the provider will have immediate insight into 
the issue and be better able to address it with the parties concerned, accommodating 
their requirements or providing incentives for them to change as business factors 
dictate.

In our example, we can say that the set of assertions generated by all consumers 
expresses the mandatory structure of the messages to be exchanged during the period 
in which the assertions remain valid for their parent applications. If the provider 
were possessed of this set of assertions, it would be able to ensure that every 
message it sends is valid for every consumer as the set of assertions is valid and 
complete.

Generalizing this structure, we can distinguish what we have already called the 
provider contract from the individual contractual obligations that obtain in instances 
of provider-consumer relationships, which we will now call consumer contracts. When 
a provider accepts and adopts the reasonable expectations expressed by a consumer, 
it enters into a consumer contract.

# Consumer-Driven Contracts

Consumer contracts allow us to reflect on the business value being exploited at any 
point in a provider's lifetime. By expressing and asserting expectations of a provider 
contract, consumer contracts effectively define which parts of that provider contract 
currently support the business value realized by the system, and which do not. This 
leads us to suggest that service communities might benefit from being specified in the 
first instance in terms of consumer contracts. In this view, provider contracts emerge 
to meet consumer expectations and demands. To reflect the derived nature of this new 
contractual arrangement, we call such provider contracts consumer-driven contracts or 
derived contracts.

The derivative nature of consumer-driven provider contracts adds a heterogamous aspect 
to the relationship between service provider and consumer. That is, providers are 
subject to an obligation that originates from outside their boundaries. This in no 
way impacts on the fundamentally autonomous nature of their implementations; it simply 
makes explicit the fact that services depend for success on their being consumed.

# Implementation

This is paradigm shift in term of service contract design and the team must be careful
not drift to consume request too much and miss the opportunity to explore the system
capability from service perspective. The designer need to balance both client side
and service side requirements and restrictions in design.

Contracts may be expressed and structured in several ways. In their simplest form, 
consumer expectations can be captured in a spreadsheet or similar document and 
implemented during the design, development and testing phases of a provider application. 
By going a little further and introducing unit tests that assert each expectation, we 
can ensure that contracts are described and enforced in a repeatable, automated fashion 
with each build. 

As with the structure of contracts, we have several options when it comes to 
communicating expectations between providers and consumers. Since the Consumer-Driven 
Contract pattern is implementation agnostic we could, given the appropriate 
organizational setup, transmit expectations simply by talking to other teams, or 
using email. Where the number of expectations and/or consumers grows too large to 
manage in this manner, we may consider introducing a contract service interface and 
implementation into the connected systems' infrastructure. Whatever the mechanism, 
it is likely communications will be conducted out-of-band and prior to any 
conversations that exercise the business functionality of the system.

# Benefits

Consumer-driven contracts offer two significant benefits when it comes to evolving 
services. First, they focus the specification and delivery of service functionality 
around key business value drivers. A service is of value to the business only to the 
extent it is consumed. Consumer-driven contracts tie service evolution to business 
value by asserting the value of exportable service community elements - the things 
that consumers require of providers to do their job. As a result, providers expose a 
lean contract that is clearly aligned with the business goals that underpin their 
consumers. Change - service evolution - only emerges where consumers express a clear 
need.

Of course, our ability to start with a minimal set of lean requirements and evolve 
our service when consumers demand that we are in a position to 
evolve, deploy and operate the service in a controlled and efficient manner. This is 
where the Consumer-Driven Contract pattern provides a second key benefit. 
Consumer-driven provider contracts give us the fine-grained insight and rapid feedback 
we require to plan changes and assess their impact on applications currently in 
production. In practice, this allows us to target individual consumers and provide 
incentives for them to relinquish an expectation that is stopping us from making a 
change that is not currently backwards- and/or forwards-compatible. By deriving our 
service providers from consumer contracts, we can have a repository of knowledge and 
a feedback mechanism that we can draw on during the operations part of the system 
lifecycle.

# Conclusion

In this article we've identified the motivation for introducing consumer-driven 
contracts into the service landscape, and thereafter described how the Consumer-Driven 
Contract pattern addresses the forces that determine service evolution. 

The Consumer-Driven Contract pattern is applicable in the context of either a single 
enterprise or a closed community of well-know services: more specifically, an 
environment in which providers can exert some influence over how consumers establish 
contracts with them. No matter how lightweight the mechanisms for communicating and 
representing expectations and obligations, providers and consumers must know about, 
accept and adopt an agreed upon set of channels and conventions. This inevitably adds 
a layer of complexity and protocol dependence to an already complex service 
infrastructure.

We've suggested that systems built around consumer-driven contracts are better able 
to manage breaking changes to contracts. But we don't mean to suggest that the pattern 
is a cure-all for the problem of breaking changes: when all's said and done, a 
breaking change is still a breaking change. We do believe, however, that the pattern 
provides many insights into what actually constitutes a breaking change, and as such 
may serve as the foundation for a service versioning strategy. 

Consumer-driven contracts do not necessarily reduce the coupling between services. 
Loosely-coupled services are relatively independent of one another, but remain coupled 
nonetheless. What the pattern does do, however, is excavate and put on display some of 
those residual, "hidden" couplings, so that providers and consumers can better 
negotiate and manage them.

The underlying assumption here is that services, by themselves, are of no value to 
the business; their value is in being consumed. By specifying services closer to 
where they are being used - by consumers - we aim to exploit business value in a lean, 
just-in-time fashion.

Finally, we should point out that there is a risk that allowing consumer contracts 
to drive the specification of a service provider may undermine the conceptual 
integrity of that provider. Services encapsulate discrete, identifiable, reusable 
business functions whose integrity should not be compromised by unreasonable demands 
falling outside their mandate.